---
title: 'Deterministic free-will'
date: 2021-08-21
permalink: /posts/2012/08/FreeWill/
tags:
  - Determinism
  - Grace
---

A post about how deterministic the world is. These are my own views about the matter - and they are formed from a Biblical understanding. I am still learning about this so bear with me if the my thoughts seem scattered.

# The tension between free-will and determinism

So much has been written about this topic. There is probably nothing new or novel that can be added. 
We will need to introduce some definitions and assumption to discuss this topic.

## 1. Frameworks

There are different thoughts and ideas about free will. Christians, Atheists, Muslims, Hindus, Zoroastrians and Buddhists have different interpretations. The analysis of discussion needs to be evaluated from a framework. This makes the assumptions clear. Unfortunately, since we are dealing with, possibly, the metaphysical, there is very little to test scientifically, if anything at all. The following sections will discuss free will and determinism from a Christian perspective, and to be honest, from a subjective Christian who reads and interprets the Bible in a manner that may differ from others (no wonder there exists so many denominations).

The obvious first principle from the Christian viewpoint, an uncontroversial one in most cases, is that God exists. Science does not really venture beyond the big bang, and believers cannot physically show God, but they can construct arguments in favor of God’s existence employing apologetical reasoning. For me it is much simpler, I believe because of revelation and mercy. From a logical point of view, I think believing or disbelieving is tantamount to ambiguity aversion. People tend to work with known probabilities instead of unknown ones, even if the unknown ones may be high. As an example, our beliefs tend to reflect inherited states and traits from our parents and surroundings. We tend to make decisions about things based on things we know and tend to avoid alternatives if there is significant ambiguity. 

We can illustrate this point using simple probability theory. What is the share of known or uncovered information to total information (covered plus uncovered)? I would suggest that this share is super small. Let’s be generous and say it is 1% (think of all things yet to be discovered about our own world, the universe/multiverse, human cognition, human anatomy, natural catastrophes etc.). Yet, we would use this information (known probabilities while ignoring the unknown ones) to make statements about things that fall outside the known – e.g. believing vs. disbelieving in God. We make these statements because we fear ambiguity and because we are biased by our inherited and anchored states. 

## 2. Definitions of free will

Free will, to me at least, implies independent **choices/actions** regardless of the environment. Does such a thing exist? I am not fully convinced.

Let’s start by creating a biased and fictitious scenario: Drinking water. You can either drink water and survive or not drink and perish in pain and discomfort. The environment forces a choice – and here your choice is dependent on the environment. Sure, you may choose to drink or not, but choose you must! You did not have the freedom not to choose. The environment determines the choice set, but there exists no option of not choosing. 

Well, do you have free will then given the choice set forced by the environment? In this case you are able to make a choice, but the probabilities are very skewed and reeks of determinism. A great majority of people will drink the water. There is an evolutionary drive to survive and that drive will likely (not with certainty) inform the choice (in this case drinking the water). 

In most environments, the likely choice to be made is one that increases survival probabilities (e.g. health, career and social outcomes). Thus, if a policy-maker were to generate the environments, they would be able to skew the outcomes in favor for themselves or some group.

The Christian decision dates back to the Garden of Eden story. Here we will need to demonstrate the (1) the temptation presented was to accept or reject God and (2) that only that choice existed (i.e. there was no other choice since everything else was permissible – evil has not entered the picture yet).

Here is a quote from Genesis 2 (verse 16-17 using NKJ):

> And the LORD God commanded the man, saying, "Of every tree of the garden you may freely eat; 17 but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat", for in the day that you eat of it you shall surely die.

Here is another quote from Genesis 3 (verse 4-5 using NKJ):

> Then the serpent said to the woman, "You will not surely die. For God knows that in the day you eat of it your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God, knowing good and evil".

Prior to the first quote, Adam and Eve were simply to enjoy being in God's presence and enjoy the earth in its natural, unharmed form. Then there was only one command – do not eat from the tree of good and evil. The second quote is the temptation. The temptation is that you will be like God, have omnipotent knowledge and live eternally. Being like God is rejecting God, since there can only be one God. Maybe put simpler, disobeying God's command is also rejecting God. The temptation thus was a test whether humans will accept or reject God. **They made that choice** and death soon followed with evil entering the world. Evil is the rejection of God.

Thus, from a Christian perspective, choice boiled down to rejecting or accepting God – a choice we are all solely responsible for. 

## 3. Fundamentally, evil is rejecting God. 

We need to distinguish the secular and ever-changing definitions of evil with the Christian conception of evil. While evil today overlaps with the Christian view, it need not necessarily be the same. Evil in the modern sense, is a violation of the golden principle, i.e., do no harm onto others lest they do harm unto you – i.e., it is **based on morality**. However, what is permitted in secular tradition might be conceived as evil from a Christian principle, in as much as it leads to a rejection of God.
 
Therefore, it is perfectly possible that secular and Christian people can be "good" using secular definitions, but in the Christian tradition no one is good except for God. Therefore, people following the Christian tradition should be less judgmental regarding choices relative to secular views. Christians are told not to judge, but to let God be the judge, simply because we are all sinners and imperfect vessels. I.e., the Christian perspective is that no one is innocent and hence goodness cannot be ascribed to humans – only God is good. Ironically, this may result in quick judgments from those that hold onto the secular moral view. Why? Because based on this morality we can distinguish those that are good from those that are bad. Secular norms tend to shift over time, and hence the moral boundaries too, whereas the Christian view (as in the Bible and not as acted out by individuals who claim to be believers) is mostly fixed. This does not mean that Christians don't judge (after all, they still sin). Furthermore, Christians are told to be discerning by keeping true to the Word of God. The process of sanctification (not justification) is to "work out our salvation". Here we do that by following Christ's example.

## Reconciling free will and determinism

It seems like a paradox, or a contradiction even – free will and determinism can simultaneously exist in the Christian framework. In the Christian framework, God is all-knowing and is God the Creator. God created the environment, and nothing can happen without His knowledge and Him allowing it.
 
Some Christians might disagree about God setting up the environment arguing instead that everything is a matter of free will. Here I will simply refer to some examples in the Bible to negate that view (the theory is rejected by example): 

- God hardened the heart of Pharaoh – making him reluctant to let Israel leave Egypt. Pharaoh's choice was predictable, because God made it so.
- God determined the results of many battles. Once again, things were determined and predictable.
- God determined that Israel will inhabit the "land of milk and honey" (Canaan).
- God warned that if certain actions are taken then it will lead to given outcomes and consequences.
- The Books of Daniel and Revelations are all about deterministic outcomes and behaviors. This type of scenario describes future outcomes, but with unknown dates.

For me, the environment is created, via the process of evolution set forth by God. And in that environment, we must choose. Our choice set is binary: reject or accept God. The rest is simple and really does not matter that much. It is fairly deterministic:

1. You are born (100\% probability)
2. You will die (100\% probability)
3. You will live between birth and death (100\% probability)
4. You will be constrained by inherited states and traits such as genetic markers, language and work as well as the ability to adapt (100\%)
5. You are more likely than not to live a life that maximizes your evolutionary chances of survival, the alternative is death (which in this case is still deterministic)

Believing in God does not mean that you won't reject Him from time to time (this is exactly what Adam and Eve did and all of humanity since the first rejection). The question is, did we have a choice of sinning or not sinning? The honest truth is that I don't know, but that it is likely we did not have a choice over the actions taken. This does not abscond us - we still **made** that action. It is perfectly possible to not want to sin, yet still sin. Our actions, which is borne out from the environment, is deterministic. More importantly, many Christians (Calvinists) believe that it is through God's grace and mercy that we are saved and forgiven from a fallen nature. It is grace and mercy because we **cannot save ourselves from sin** (we have all sinned and sin is rejecting God). God's election is righteous – for who can tell the Maker what is just or unjust. If you believe that you are a created being, then the Creator has full right to do what He wishes with His creation. That we are not destroyed for sinning is a mercy. The Christian view is hence one of absolute humility in a double sense: (1) Acknowledging our insignificance and not thinking of ourselves as gods and (2) and acknowledging that our attempts to be reconciled or saved through works are futile. Understanding this helps us define an identity of the self in right relation to God, humans and nature. It should also bring forth gratitude and absolute thanks - because we deserve nothing, yet if God will it, obtain life.
 
Christian faith in Christ leads to an inward, spiritual shift, via a unification with God through the Holy Spirit and a forgiveness of sin and hence escape from death. This Christian faith is brough forth from God’s deterministic salvation – it is by no knowledge or power of ourselves that we can come to faith.
 
God’s mercy and the faith that it brings should bear fruit – these are gifts from the Holy Spirit, and they are love, kindness, patience, and all manner of goodness (though we are never good). Good works follow from God’s mercy. We cannot earn salvation because deeds do not somehow reduce our sins. There is no balance and there is no action that can repair your relationship with God. And hence no Christian can be boastful of how good he or she is. The beauty of it all is that God brings that unification, even though we were responsible for the separation.
