# Evil, its fundamentally part of us

My previous blog articles proposed that we are all evil. It also suggested that evil is not only a learned thing, but that we are vessels of it from birth. My claims are based on observation and Christian theology.

I noted that we are able to observe a good deed and can identify what good is. However, from the self-referential view, we cannot be good. "Our best deeds are like filthy rags". The trouble with this supposition is that we need a definition of evil. I claimed that a person can still be evil even if she avoids evil acts. Just because there are societal boundaries on actions (e.g., if you murder then you go to prison) does not mean that a lack of desired act makes us good. Evil is the desire, the outcome is just the realization of the evil thought.

I went further than just noting that we have evil thoughts (i.e., to cause harm to others). I also suggested that evil resides even when our desires are to do good onto others. I do not think it is too much a stretch to claim that all actions have behind it some polluted element. If I do good to others, I do so because there is some utility I derive from doing good (e.g., praise or feeling useful). The outcome (e.g., doing a good deed) seems to be polluted by an inherent selfish desire - i.e., we cannot separate the pure outcome from the egoistical desire. It is this polluted state, and hence our inability to be truly selfless in our acts, that make us evil too. 

I can hear some of you strongly oppose these hypothesis. There are two counterarguments to my suggestion. The first is that evil does not exist at all. A lion kills another lion in battle. Does that make the lion evil? The lion is only doing what is natural to it. Extrapolating this to human behaviour - if someone commits a murder, then by the same logic that person did not commit evil, but is doing only what comes naturally. There are two flaws with this argument. The first is that lions can be evil. There is intent to kill a member of the tribe. There is aggression and there is a power battle. If we can claim that lions can be evil then this argument of anthropomorphizing nature is moot. If you are a pure Darwinian and do not believe in a god, then you must take the stance that whatever act or thought is committed cannot be evil. If only the will to survive drives us then our actions are part of that natural process. Then pshychopaths are apex predators in this world and not evil. 

The other argument against evil is that it is only learned and not naturally part of us. That it is also only temporary and that humans can be good for most part. To believe this hypothesis you must believe in a god. But you must also believe in the strength of humans to defeat evil. The problem with this approach is that the definition of evil is primarily restricted to deeds committed. A person who does not act out their desires can even be considered good and brave. Good deeds done is good even if the person has a polluted component to doing a good deed. The claim is that good can and does stand by itself regardless of the the polluted thought. Polluted thoughts do not make a person evil. However, we must ask ourselves, if someone was good, and then committed a crime, what drove that person to act that way? Is this only a learned response from observing other criminals? Or was there always evil inside that person that just became inflamed and gave way to committing a crime? How does someone have the knowledge of theft, murder, deceit, covetousness and cheating if it is not already within us? Babies when they are born know how to manipulate parents to get food, even when no one taught them how to do it. The only learned aspect about evil is the efficiency and coldness of committing an evil deed. The thought predated the outcome and the thought manifest itself because evil was already present.

Humans do not really like being in this world. It is hard and painful. Disease, fears and heartbreak make living sour. Obviously there are moments of joy. For most people the end of their lives is something they look forward to. For the atheist it is simply returning to dust and a wiping out of all memory. For a religious person it is the hope of one day being in heaven where there is no pain and suffering. Humans want to escape the real world into some other state or world. It is common among all of us. What drives this desire? In essense we want to escape ourselves. We feel pain and evil, but know not ourselves and hence wish for state where we are not evil. Unfortunately escaping evil by your own power is impossible. It is part of you. I made the claim, repeating a Christian view, that you need to be reborn. You need to be given a new heart, mind and soul. A complete renewal is required to get rid of something that was within you from the beginning. Christ's sacrificed served this purpose - and the indwelling of the Holy Spirit reforms us daily.

Does this mean that free-will does not exist because we are fundamentally evil? Could a murderer then not have avoided murdering someone? Unfortunately we cannot justify our actions away - even though evil is part of us, we still choose to act out. We still choose evil. Free-will and evil nature co-exist. You and I are fully responsible for our thoughts and actions.  