---
title: 'The impossibility of being good'
date: 2022-10-30
permalink: /posts/2022/10/Depraved/
tags:
  - Sin
  - Forgiveness
---

A short(ish) post about how we cannot be good. There is, however, hope in the form of justification and sanctification.

# The impossibility of being good

Frustration builds when attempts at anything continuously fail. Frustration turns into anxiety and despair when attempts dissipate. 

There is a definition of good. It is not some subjective description that compares one human to another, or one group to another. There is a standard. The minimum of that standard requires that we do not cause harm to others, lest harm come our way. Societies value life and hence murder is considered bad. But not murdering someone does not mean that you are good. You cannot be considered as good just because action proceed from thought. Hence, action itself is neither an indication of good or bad, but merely a reflex of thought at a given moment. A moment that is fleeting. 

The reason why your actions do not materialize thoughts of cheating or murdering or lying is because there are counteracting thoughts. Thoughts of consequences might frighten you and supress desire. Thoughts of humiliation will also dampen desire. The counteracting act is thus a human trait - cowardice, which is also not good. The initial thought was bad, the counter thought was also bad. Thus, your actions are not an indication of whether you are good or bad. Thus, the golden rule of not harming another lest harm come your way is only a protection mechanism for interacting individuals. It helps us navigate the space between people, but is by no means an indication of good vs. bad.

Good is also not a feeling. One cannot consider oneself as good just because you feel it. Your actions, which are not by definition good or bad, might indicate that your thoughts are bad or good. Thus, to be good your thoughts and actions need to be simultaneously aligned. To be good, these thoughts and actions need to be aligned for all periods, not just points in time, unless we want to make statements about being good or bad in a particular point in time. However, doing and thinking bad things at any point in time indicates that we are not generally good. The bar for being good means that you started out good, and continue to be so. 

There is not a single person meets this bar. Our thoughts betray us even if our actions are constrained. Your thoughts are impure if you desire the spouse of another. Your thoughts are impure if you want to kill someone. Your thoughts reveal badness even when you do seemingly good deeds. Is there really a selfless motive in helping the afflicted? Or is there, deep down inside of you, a sense of doing something nice for another because you feel good doing so. The desire to feel good when you do something for someone else seems to betray the true intent of your sacrifice. 

What actions and thoughts can be considered good then? Are there any? I think we experience glimpses of goodness, but not in ourselves. We see goodness as expressions by others. We can name it and we can notice it. We see individuals who lay down their lives to protect the innocent. We see acts of kindness to the old and hungry. We see gentleness when a teacher leads a student. We see love as a parent raises a child. We see patience when a colleague is unproductive. We witness and experience acts of goodness. We thus can describe certain characteristics of goodness, but are somehow unable to be good. The ability to notice goodness is important for us to become humble about our true spiritual state. The person showing kindness, love, patience and gentleness does not necessarily do those things while being absolutely good. As an outside observer, it looks as though that person is good. However, if we were to peer into the deeper thoughts of that person, we will see that even those actions are tainted. Often people do good acts to feel better about themselves, or the do good acts to receive some form of praise. No, even our best deeds are filthy [Isaiah 64 v 6](https://www.biblegateway.com/verse/en/Isaiah%2064%3A6):

> But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; and we all do fade as a leaf; and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away.

This is incredibly hard to swallow. Logically it makes sense that no one is born to be good. For an atheist, good or bad is cultural and societal evolution - a means to survive. Thus, being good or bad is not an inherent trait, but one adopted to survive or even thrive. As a Christian, however, **all of humanity** is inherently depraved. Our very nature is corrupt and in rebellion to God, who is good. We are simply incapable of being good. We are certainly incapable of meeting our own definitions of good, let alone God's standard that calls for all the be righteous. 

There are some people who believe that deeds are really all that matters. And so, if you can discipline your physical actions, even though your mind desires something else, then you are somehow counted as good. However, this is only a delusion. We want to think of ourselves as good, but there is no indication that we are. Even our justification of deeds as goods reveals how corrupt we are. We are proud and unrepentant.

If we cannot be good, then are we doomed? We are doomed if we try to be good. If our nature is corrupt, then it is our nature that must be replaced by something incorruptible to be considered good. We need a new heart, mind and soul. It requires a miracle to receive a new heart, mind and soul. For the Christian, it is only by God's mercy and grace that we receive the gift of rebirth - where we are altered. The reason why Christ is the center figure is because He gave us this gift if we only believe. We cannot believe unless God justifies us. We are justified and cleansed from evil because Christ suffered, on our behalf, on the cross.

The rub is that not all people care about being justified. The truth is that most of us like our filth, otherwise we would not be filthy. Like pigs or dogs who roll in mud, our nature is to be bad. We choose to entertain our evil thoughts and we often lack the discipline to stop evil deeds - all because we revel in being evil. 

No one is exempt from this. **All** chose evil over good. Many people do not like being called evil. Evil to them is the murderer, the thief, the rapist and the molester. Yes, those things are evil and those deeds despicable. But let us not fool ourselves into thinking that we are any better. Murderers are incapable of suppressing desire. The desire leads to the deed. However, someone who compulsively lies also shows a lack of discipline - the desire to lie exceeds the discipline of telling only truth. The liar and the murderer share the same base - desire and exercise of thought into deed. The only difference is the degree of harm on another in physical form.

Being a Christian means that you are fundamentally aware of just how bad you are. Before being a Christian you were merely unaware of being bad. Bad is a de facto state, but Christianity brings awareness of that state. Christianity holds onto Christ for cleansing us and making us right with God who demands righteousness.

We are thankful to Christ because He justified us. However, since we still live in evil world and since our physical bodies are not transformed, we are still subject to making mistakes. However now we are made aware of sin. We feel it and it burdens us. We confess and we seek forgiveness and hope on the Lord to cleanse us. The Holy Spirit indwells us when we are justified and helps us become sanctified. We work towards righteousness and fight a spiritual battle daily. However, it is God who defeats death and leads us to redemption. Becoming sanctified is to die to our earthly nature - [Colossians 3 v 5](https://www.biblestudytools.com/colossians/3-5.html).

> Put to death, therefore, whatever belongs to your earthly nature: sexual immorality, impurity, lust, evil desires and greed, which is idolatry. 

---------------------------

Now I am faced with the realization that I am evil. But, also that I am unable to yet manifest the fruits of the Spirit, which are good. It is the Holy Spirit that works within us to rid us of this animal mind and to bestow upon us the fruits of goodness. The tension occurs because I am attempting to be good and fail miserably at it. What is required is much simpler - full reliance on God to deliver me from my evil nature.

Just when there are periods of peace, the ugly head of temptation rears its head and I plunge forward to give into my evil desires. 

The honest truth is that I willed those evil actions and desires. I did not stop being bad, because fundamentally I am still bad. I yield to temptation because I chose the flesh over what God desires for me - which is to be a good and faithful servant.

Yet, I also desire to be a good and faithful servant. I want to serve God. I back off just in case I do not enter with a pure and cleansed soul. How can I worship Almighty God if I fall short of His glory? The answer lies only with Christ. 

How good is Christ, that He would bear all my evil; past, present and future so that I might be considered righteous? I am weak, yet Christ lifts me up. I do not deserve this yet know that I cannot and wish not to be without His mercy. I fail my Lord in spite of His goodness. It humbles me, but my humility does not translate into faithfulness. I am eager to sing my Lord's praises, but fall short at the first sign of temptation.

I pray that the Lord will continue His miracle - that sanctification will come and the death of sin will prevail in my life - so that my life is one of faith and absolute obedience. Lord, I am ashamed of my thoughts and actions. I purposefully chose evil over serving you. I do not wish it - Lord - please forgive me again and again and again. I know I am not deserving or worthy. Have mercy my God. I pray this in Your Holy Name. Amen.  